Blog: Validating Policy (#2029)
kyverno/website: src/content/blog/validating-policy/index.md

---
date: 2026-05-22
title: Your Cluster Has No Rules. ValidatingPolicy Fixes That.
tags:
  - General
authors:
  - name: Kirti Goyal
excerpt: Learn how Kyverno ValidatingPolicy works with real-world examples for enforcing labels, resource limits, trusted registries, and production safeguards in Kubernetes.
draft: true
---

> Here's something that surprises most people when they first start working with Kubernetes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Something that surprises most people when they first start working with Kubernetes is that
```

by default, a cluster will accept almost anything thrown at it.

No resource limits? Sure. No labels? Fine. Privileged containers? Go ahead.
That's completely fine for learning.

But in a real shared cluster, one bad manifest can:

> - consume all node resources,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- consume all node resources
```

> - bypass security controls,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- bypass security controls
```

> - or create deployments that become impossible to manage later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- create deployments that become impossible to manage later
```

> Kubernetes doesn't judge. It just runs whatever it's told to. That's why rules become necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kubernetes doesn't judge instructions, rather it responds to instructions and runs whatever it's told to run. Because of this, using rules to establish what and how things run is necessary.
```

> That's when Kyverno's `ValidatingPolicy` comes in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is when Kyverno's `ValidatingPolicy` comes in to play.
```

## What ValidatingPolicy actually does

> You can think of it like an automated code review that runs on every resource before it enters the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Think of `ValidatingPolicy` like an automated code review that runs on every resource before it enters the cluster.
```

> Except instead of relying on a human reviewer who might miss something or approve a bad change during a busy day, the policy runs automatically on every request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The advantage of using a Kyverno policy instead of relying on a human reviewer who might miss something or approve a bad change during a busy day, is that a policy is run and applied on every request at admission ensuring that the same standards are always met.
```

Every time someone runs `kubectl apply`, Kyverno intercepts that request and evaluates
the policy expression. If the expression returns `true`, the resource passes. If it
returns `false`, the resource is blocked and the person gets the error message back.

## Two modes: block it or just watch it

> Before writing anything, there's one decision to make for every ValidatingPolicy:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before writing anything, there's one decision to make for every `ValidatingPolicy`:
```

> either block violations, or just report them?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Deny` violations or `Audit` violations.
```

```yaml
validationActions:
  - Deny # blocks the request, so nothing gets created
```

```yaml
validationActions:
  - Audit # allows the request but logs the violation in a PolicyReport
```

This matters more than it seems. When introducing a new policy to an existing cluster,
starting with `Deny` is almost never the right move. It'll block things that are already
running and cause incidents.

**The safer approach**: start with `Audit` first. Let it run for a few days, see what it

> catches, fix the existing violations, then switch to Deny.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
catches, fix the existing violations, then switch to `Deny`.
```

        resources: ['pods'] # which resource type?
  validations:
    - expression: 'your CEL expression here' # must return true to pass
      message: 'what the user sees when blocked'
```

Four things to understand:

- **`matchConstraints`**: This is the **filter**. Which resources does this policy apply to? Like which API group, which operations. Think of it as deciding who gets checked at this particular door.

- **`operations`**: `CREATE` only catches new resources. Add `UPDATE` to also catch
  changes to existing ones. Most security policies should include both otherwise someone
  can create a compliant resource and then edit it to remove the required fields.

- **`validations.expression`**: This is the actual rule that's written in CEL. It must evaluate to `true` for the resource to be allowed. If it evaluates to `false`, Kyverno blocks it.

- **`validations.message`**: This is what the developer sees when they're blocked. Make this
  useful. Just seeing "Validation failed" tells nobody anything. Whereas, "All containers must define resource limits. See the platform docs for guidance" is actually helpful.

## Use case 1: Require labels on every Pod

> This is the most common ValidatingPolicy there is. Labels are how teams organize, monitor, and route traffic in Kubernetes. A Pod without proper labels is like an unlabeled box

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the most common `ValidatingPolicy` there is. Labels are how teams organize, monitor, and route traffic in Kubernetes. A pod without proper labels is like an unlabeled box
```

        operations: ['CREATE', 'UPDATE']
        resources: ['pods']
  validations:
    - expression: >
        object.spec.containers.all(c,
          has(c.resources) &&
          has(c.resources.limits) &&
          has(c.resources.limits.cpu) &&
          has(c.resources.limits.memory)
        )
      message: 'All containers must define both CPU and memory limits.'
```

The `all()` function is CEL's way of saying "this must be true for every item in this
list." Here it checks every container in the Pod and not just the first one.

**Try it:**

Apply the policy, then try this Pod:

```yaml
# bad-pod.yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: greedy-pod
  labels:
    team: platform
spec:
  containers:
    - name: nginx
      image: nginx
      # no resource limits defined
```

```bash
kubectl apply -f bad-pod.yaml
```

It gets **blocked**. Now add limits:

```yaml
# good-pod.yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: good-pod
  labels:
    team: platform
spec:
  containers:
    - name: nginx
      image: nginx
      resources:
        limits:
          cpu: '500m'
          memory: '128Mi'
```

```bash
kubectl apply -f good-pod.yaml
```

This one is **allowed**.

> 

Reviewer: Seeing as we have `ImageValidatingPolicy`i think we might want to use a different use case here and leverage this for the image policy speaking to supply chain security in a different blog post. What do you think @kirti763

```bash
# Confirm the policy was applied
kubectl get validatingpolicy

# Check for violations in policy reports
kubectl get policyreport -A -o wide

# Check Kyverno admission controller logs
kubectl logs -n kyverno -l app.kubernetes.io/component=admission-controller
```

**Here are most common reasons why a policy doesn't seem to work:**

- The policy was applied to the wrong namespace
- The `operations` field only has `CREATE` but the violation is on an `UPDATE`
- The resource kind doesn't match what's in `matchConstraints`

## The autogen feature: write once, cover everything

When a ValidatingPolicy targets Pods, Kyverno can automatically generate equivalent
rules for Deployments, Jobs, CronJobs, and StatefulSets as well. Because all of those eventually create Pods.

```yaml
spec:
  autogen:
    podControllers:
      controllers:
        - deployments
        - jobs
        - cronjobs
        - statefulsets
```

You just have to apply one rule. Kyverno handles the rest.

## Want to experiment without a cluster?

Try any of the policies in this guide directly in the browser:
https://playground.kyverno.io/

> Paste the policy on the left side, paste any of the test pods on the right, and see exactly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Want to try out `ValidatingPolicy`along with the other new Kyverno policy types? Jump in to the playground. Paste the policy on the left side, paste any of the test pods on the right, and see exactly
```

> what Kyverno would do. You don't need any setup for this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
what Kyverno can do!
```
